---
title: Principles of Programming Languages (CS1.402)
subtitle: |
          | 15 October, Saturday (Lecture 18)
author: Taught by Prof. Venkatesh Choppella
header-includes: \usepackage{proof}
---

# Lambda Calculus
Some important lambda calculus terms:
$$\begin{split}
I &= \lambda x. x \\
\omega &= \lambda x. (x \, x) \\
\Omega &= \omega \, \omega \\
K &= \lambda x. \lambda y. x \\
\end{split}$$
Terms like these, with no free variables, are called *combinators*.

## Rewrite Rules
We have two rewrite rules for the reduction system of lambda calculus.

The first rule concerns the application of an abstraction:
$$(\lambda x. e_1) \, e_2 \overset\beta\hookrightarrow e_1[x/e_2]$$
This is called $\beta$-reduction.

The next rule concerns the abstraction of an application:
$$\begin{split}
x \notin \text{FV}(e) \implies& \\
&(\lambda x. e \, x) \overset\eta\hookrightarrow e
\end{split}$$
This is called $\eta$-reduction.

## Lambda Calculus as an ASR
The set $A$ of expressions for the ASR of lambda calculus is simply the set of lambda calculus terms. We need to define the relation $(\to)$; we will proceed inductively.

$$\begin{split}
e \hookrightarrow e' \implies& \\
&e \to e' \\
e_1 \to e_1' \implies& \\
&e_1 \, e_2 \to e_1' \, e_2 \\
e_2 \to e_2' \implies& \\
&e_1 \, e_2 \to e_1 \, e_2' \\
e \to e' \implies& \\
&\lambda x. e \to \lambda x. e'
\end{split}$$

### Properties
Is lambda calculus terminating? Consider the term $\Omega = \omega \, \omega$, where $\omega = \lambda x. (x \, x)$. If we try to reduce this term, we get
$$\begin{split}
\Omega &= \omega \, \omega \\
&= (\lambda x. x \, x) \, (\lambda x. x \, x) \\
&= (x \, x)[x/(\lambda x. x \, x)] \\
&= (\lambda x. x \, x) \, (\lambda x. x \, x) = \Omega
\end{split}$$
Thus, lambda calculus is *not* terminating.

Is lambda calculus confluent? Consider the expression $KI\Omega$. One way to reduce it (the Haskell way) would be
$$\begin{split}
KI\Omega &= (\lambda y. \lambda x. x) \, \Omega \\
&= (\lambda x. x)[y/\Omega] \\
&= I
\end{split}$$
However, we could also reduce from the right (the Racket way), getting
$$\begin{split}
KI\Omega &= KI(\omega \, \omega) \\
&= KI(\omega \, \omega) \\
&= \dots
\end{split}$$
This illustrates an important property of lambda calculus – reduction is *nondeterministic*. In order to build a programming language on top of it, we need to fix a rule for the order of reductions to proceed in.

However, this is not a counterexample to confluence – the two terms $KI\Omega$ and $I$ both reduce to $I$, and so are joined. Lambda calculus is, in fact, confluent. We can sketch a proof of this claim as follows:

We know that a term $e$ can possibly be reduced parallelly in multiple ways.
For example, if $e = (\lambda z.(I \, z))$, we can reduce via $\beta$-reduction to get $(\lambda z. z)$, or via $\eta$-rewriting to get $I$.  
Let $e = (((\lambda z. (\omega \, z)^1)^2)(I \, I)^3)^4$. We can now parallelly reduce $e$ in the following ways:

* $\beta^1:$ 
* $\eta^2:$
* $\beta^3:$ $I$ applied $I$ would reduce to $I$; thus we get
$$e \to ((\lambda z. (\omega \, z)) \, I).$$
* $\beta^4:$ Substituting $z$ with $(I \, I)$ in the body of the lambda gives us
$$e \to (\omega \, (I \, I)).$$

We define a new reduction relation $\triangleright$, which has four important properties:

* $(\to) \subseteq (\triangleright)$
* $(\triangleright) \subseteq (\overset{*}\to)$
* $(\triangleright)^* = (\overset{*}\to)$
* $\triangleright$ satisfies the diamond property.
 