---
title: Principles of Programming Languages (CS1.402)
subtitle: |
          | 02 November, Wednesday (Lecture 23)
author: Taught by Prof. Venkatesh Choppella
header-includes: \usepackage{proof}
---

# Continuations
## Continuation-Passing Style (contd.)
As an example, we can write a function to compute the $n^\text{th}$ Fibonacci number using CPS.
```scheme
(define (fib/c n k)
  (cond [(= n 0) (k 0)]
        [(= n 1) (k 1)]
        [else (fib/c (- n 1)
                     (lambda (v)
                       (fib/c (- n 2)
                              (lambda (w)
                                (k (+ v w))))))]))
```

## Converting Programs to CPS
Consider an arbitrary program that has to be written in CPS. This can be carried out in the following steps:

* Add a parameter `k` to the function for a continuation.
* If a value is being returned, call `k` on it.
* If there is a recursive call, substitute the expression containing it with a tail call, with a new continuation passed to it. This continuation is built on `k`.

We can write, for example, the `list-map` function in CPS. The direct style for this function is
```scheme
(define (list-map h ls)
  (cond
    [(null? ls) '()]
    [(else (cons (h (fst ls))
                 (list-map h (rest ls))))]))
```

In CPS, we have
```scheme
(define (list-map/c h/c ls k)
  (cond
    [(null? ls) (k '())]
    [else (h/c (fst ls)
               (lambda (v)
                 (list-map h/c (rest ls)
                   (lambda (w)
                     (k (cons v w))))))]))
```

## CPS Interpreter
Consider a program `(+ 2 (f 1))`, where `f` refers to the factorial function. This is evaluated in an environment
$$\sigma = \{f \mapsto c\},$$
where
$$c = \langle n, \text{fact-body}, \sigma \rangle.$$

Now, to find the value of the application, we evaluate fact-body in the environment $\alpha\sigma$, where
$$\alpha = \{n \mapsto 1\}.$$

This then involves evaluating fact-body in the environment $\beta\alpha\sigma$, where
$$\beta = \{n \mapsto 0\}.$$
This evaluates to 1, which makes the surrounding call return 1.

We will now evaluate this AST using `eval-ast/c`, a CPS interpreter. This starts with $\sigma$ as the environment, as before, but also a top-level continuation (a closure with an empty continuation)
$$k_T = \langle \langle (v), v, \phi \rangle, \bot \rangle.$$

This leads us to the evaluation of fact-body, which is done (as before) with environment $\alpha\sigma$, and with a new continuation
$$k_1 = \langle \langle (v), (2 + v), \sigma \rangle, k_T \rangle.$$

We then move to the inner application, which is evaluated in $\beta\alpha\sigma$, with
$$k_2 = \langle \langle (v), (n \cdot v), \alpha\sigma \rangle, k_1 \rangle.$$

This evaluates to calling $k_2$ on 1. This gives us 1, which is bound to $v$ in an environment $\gamma$. This causes the body to evaluate to 1, which is passed to $k_1$, which binds it to $v$ and adds it to 2. This returns 3, which is passed to $k_T$, which returns 3.