---
title: Principles of Programming Languages (CS1.402)
subtitle: |
          | 02 November, Wednesday (Lecture 22)
author: Taught by Prof. Venkatesh Choppella
header-includes: \usepackage{proof}
---

# Continuations
Consider the computation `(+ 2 (* 3 (! 3)))`. If we want to compute `(! 3)`, we can assume a "hole" in the expression where `(! 3)` is, and treat is as a lambda. We call this the *context* of the computation `(! 3)`.
$$k = \hat{\lambda} \square . (2 + 3\square)$$

The hat on the $\lambda$ indicates that this is a *top-level* function – once it executes, it escapes. It does not execute its context. For example, `(k 4)` and `(+ 1 (k 4))` both evaluate to 14. This is called an *escaping procedure*.  
An escaping procedure of one argument is called a *continuation*.

Examples of an escaping procedure include errors and exceptions.

## Continuation-Passing Style
Consider the definition
```scheme
(define (! n)
  (if (= n 0)
      1
      (* n (! (- n 1)))))
```
What is the continuation around `(! (- n 1))`? Suppose that `k` is the continuation around `(! n)`; then we can say that the context around `(! (- n 1))` is
$$\hat\lambda\square.(k \, (n\square))$$

However, the continuations are implicit in this definition (this is called the *direct style* of programming). We can make them explicit, writing our programs in *continuation-passing style*, as follows:
```scheme
(define (!/c n k)
  (if (= n 0)
      (k 1)
      (!/c (- n 1)
           (lambda (v)
             (k (* n v))))))
```
Here, the argument `k` is a continuation – an escaping procedure of one argument.  
Note that functions in CPS *never* return a value. Functions in direct style are abstracted from their callers – there is no information where the value is being returned to. Functions in CPS, on the other hand, simply pass on a value to some other function (the waiting continuation).

Note that the CPS definition of factorial is *tail-recursive*.